#+TITLE: Learning Android development by hacking MobileOrg

November 29th, 2010 -
[[http://sachachua.com/blog/p/21928][http://sachachua.com/blog/p/21928]]

I spent most of Saturday plunging into Android development, starting
from the
[[http://developer.android.com/guide/tutorials/hello-world.html][Hello
World]] and
[[http://developer.android.com/guide/tutorials/notepad/index.html][Notepad]]
tutorials. It was lots of fun. I wanted to use MobileOrg on Android, but
it lacked a lot of things that were in MobileOrg for iPhone, so I taught
myself Android development by fixing little things that a newbie like me
could do.

First: I wanted the capture form to resize itself when the soft keyboard
was displayed, instead of letting the virtual keyboard hide the Save
button. Fortunately, I'd come across a solution while reading
[[http://developer.android.com/resources/articles/index.html][the
technical articles]] on developer.android.com: resize the
[[http://developer.android.com/resources/articles/on-screen-inputs.html][activity
based on the onscreen input method]]. I tested it on my system, then
reported the issue and the fix through
[[https://github.com/matburt/mobileorg-android][MobileOrg's github]].
Within a few hours, the fix was included in the project. Yay! (It took
me a while to figure out I could use the back button to hide the
keyboard, but it was a productive while.)

Second: The editing interface was functional but not convenient , so I
dug into views and layouts and all sorts of niftiness. Before and after:

[[file:uploads/2010/11/editbefore.png][file:uploads/2010/11/editbefore_thumb.png]]
[[file:uploads/2010/11/after.png][file:uploads/2010/11/after_thumb.png]]

(... and it's all wired up and working, at least for me!)

Mwahaha! Along the way, I ended up learning about org-mobile.el and how
to set up a somewhat finicky configuration so that I could synchronize
my files over Dropbox onto my SD card and into MobileOrg, and then back
over Dropbox and into my computer. It's not fully automatic, but the
pieces are mostly connected now. The relevant parts of my experimental
config:

#+BEGIN_EXAMPLE
    (setq org-mobile-directory "~/dropbox/mobile")
    (setq org-mobile-inbox-for-pull "~/personal/mobileorg.org")
    (setq default-buffer-file-coding-system 'utf-8)
    (setq org-mobile-files '("~/personal/organizer.org" "~/personal/outline.org" "~/personal/test.org"))
    (setq org-mobile-agendas '("a"))
#+END_EXAMPLE

Then I used M-x org-mobile-push to sync things up. There was a bit of a
kerfluffle I had to sort out. I moved files around, so I needed to
delete the /sdcard/mobileorg database on my Android, and I also needed
to download the checksums and other files using Dropbox before loading
them in MobileOrg. But things work reasonably well now, I think, and I
can browse my Org files and capture some updates. Whee!

[[file:uploads/2010/11/main.png][file:uploads/2010/11/main_thumb.png]]
[[file:uploads/2010/11/organizer.png][file:uploads/2010/11/organizer_thumb.png]]
[[file:uploads/2010/11/outline2.png][file:uploads/2010/11/outline2_thumb.png]]

... and so on.

Next step: Talk to my manager about open source approvals so that I can
share my patches with the community. There's still plenty more to build
on top of MobileOrg, but at least I've taken care of the two big things
that were getting in my way.

I'll have to decide whether I'm going to build my other app ideas as
separate lightweight apps, or be evil and store as much data as I can
into [[http://orgmode.org][Org]]... >:) Hmm. Org as grocery list, price
tracker, inventory management, and recipe database? Org as sewing
organizer for patterns, notions, fabric, measurements, and projects? Org
as a hammer for an unbelievable variety of nails?

Mwahahaha!

(Okay, maybe I'll build things for SQLite first, but there'll probably
be some kind of .org or CSV eventually...)
