#+TITLE: Emacs, artbollocks-mode.el, and writing more clearly

December 16th, 2011 -
[[http://sachachua.com/blog/p/23072][http://sachachua.com/blog/p/23072]]

Analyzing the text of my blog showed me that I use some phrases way too
much. Fortunately, Emacs can shame me into writing better, thanks to Art
Bollocks Mode. (Update 2012-06-16: I've forked it and cleaned up the
naming conventions:
[[https://github.com/sachac/artbollocks-mode][https://github.com/sachac/artbollocks-mode]])

Art Bollocks Mode monitors your writing and highlights words or patterns
you may want to reconsider. It can detect repeated words which sometimes
slip past proof-reading. It has a list of common passive verbs, making
it easier for you to rewrite the sentences to use the active voice. It
detects weasel words like “many” and “surprisingly”. It even comes with
jargon catchers for art critics (“postmodern”, “ironic”, and so forth)
-- hence artbollocks-mode.el.

Whenever you use a phrase that matches its patterns, Emacs highlights
it, turning it an ugly orange-on-white and underlining it for emphasis.
You can still go ahead and write it, but at least the words jump out.
Like this: it's really pretty obvious...

[[file:uploads/2011/12/image3.png][file:uploads/2011/12/image_thumb3.png]]

I want to use it to write clearer notes and blog posts, so here's how
I've tweaked my configuration. Many of the items below are words and
phrases I want to use less. Others are part of work jargon that I'm
trying my best to keep out of my regular use.

#+BEGIN_EXAMPLE
    (require 'artbollocks-mode)
    ;; Avoid these phrases
    (setq weasel-words-regex
          (concat "\\b" (regexp-opt
                         '("one of the"
                           "should"
                           "just"
                           "sort of"
                           "a lot"
                           "probably"
                           "maybe"
                           "perhaps"
                           "I think"
                           "really"
                           "pretty"
                           "maybe"
                           "nice"
                           "action"
                           "utilize"
                           "leverage") t) "\\b"))
    ;; Fix a bug in the regular expression to catch repeated words
    (setq lexical-illusions-regex "\\b\\(\\w+\\)\\W+\\(\\1\\)\\b")
    ;; Don't show the art critic words, or at least until I figure
    ;; out my own jargon
    (setq artbollocks nil)
    ;; Make sure keywords are case-insensitive
    (defadvice search-for-keyword (around sacha activate)
      "Match in a case-insensitive way."
      (let ((case-fold-search t))
        ad-do-it))
#+END_EXAMPLE

(Isn't =regexp-opt= so cool?)

artbollocks-mode.el also includes some basic readability statistics like
the
[[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flesch–Kincaid_readability_test#Flesch_Reading_Ease][Flesch
reading ease]] and
[[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flesch–Kincaid_readability_test#Flesch.E2.80.93Kincaid_Grade_Level][Flesch-Kincaid
grade level]]. When I analyzed my blog contents without source code
blocks (all the Emacs Lisp code snippets were throwing off my numbers!),
it turned out that my blog hovers around 65 in terms of Flesch reading
ease, or around the same as Reader's Digest (as reported by Wikipedia).
The Flesch-Kincaid grade level for my posts in 2011 was around 8.4.

I'd use artbollocks-mode.el's tools for calculating word count and
readability, except that Emacs ends up including source code blocks
because Art Bollocks doesn't know about Org Mode. I might be able to
work around that by defining more advice or creating my own functions
that extract the relevant text into a temporary buffer before
determining the text statistics. I can leave that for another day,
though.

I'll experiment with making it part of org-capture-mode for now. If I
find that getting editing feedback distracts me too much from writing,
I'll remove it from the hook and toggle it when I'm ready. Here's the
code to turn it on automatically for =org-capture=:

#+BEGIN_EXAMPLE
    (add-hook 'org-capture-mode-hook 'artbollocks-mode)
#+END_EXAMPLE

Thanks to
[[https://twitter.com/#!/dotemax/status/147465007989403648][dotemax]]
for tweeting about writegood and artbollocks-mode.el. Onward and upward!

-  [[https://gitorious.org/robmyers/scripts/blobs/master/artbollocks-mode.el][Art
   Bollocks Mode]]
-  [[http://asap.foocorp.net/cgi-bin/movabletype/mt-search.cgi?blog_id=13&tag=emacs&limit=20][Rob
   Myers' Emacs-related blog posts]]

