#+TITLE: How I use Emacs Org Mode for my weekly reviews

June 26th, 2013 -
[[http://sachachua.com/blog/p/25043][http://sachachua.com/blog/p/25043]]

*Summary: I use a
custom*[[http://sachachua.com/dotemacs#weekly-review][*Emacs Lisp
function*]]*to extract my upcoming tasks and logged tasks from my Org
agenda, and I combine that with data from QuantifiedAwesome.com using a
JSON interface.*

I use [[http://orgmode.org][Emacs Org Mode]] to keep track of my tasks
because of its flexibility. It's difficult to imagine doing the kinds of
things I do with a different task management system. For example, I've
written some code that extracts data from my Org Mode task list and my
QuantifiedAwesome.com time log to give me the basis of a weekly review.
Here's what my workflow is like.

Throughout the week, I add tasks to Org Mode to represent things that I
plan to do. I also create tasks for things I've done that I want to
remember, as I find that I forget things even within a week. I track my
time through [[http://quantifiedawesome.com][QuantifiedAwesome.com]], a
website I built myself for tracking things that I'm curious about.

On Saturday, I use [[http://sachachua.com/dotemacs#weekly-review][*M-x
sacha/org-prepare-weekly-review*]], which:

-  runs org-agenda for the upcoming week and extracts all my non-routine
   tasks
-  runs org-agenda in log mode and extracts all finished tasks from the
   previous week
-  gets the time summary from Quantified Awesome's JSON interface

Here's what the raw output looks like:

[[http://sachachua.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/image5.png][[[http://sachachua.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/image_thumb6.png]]]]

I like including a list of blog posts so that people can click on them
if they missed something during the week. Besides, my blog posts often
help me remember what I did that week. I customized my WordPress theme
to give me an org-friendly list if I add ?org=1 to the date URL. For
example, here's the list for this month:
[[http://sachachua.com/blog/2013/06/?org=1][sachachua.com/blog/2013/06/?org=1]]
. I copy and paste the relevant part of the list (or lists, for weeks
near the beginning or end of a month) into the *Blog posts section*. I
could probably automate this, but I haven't bothered.

Then I organize the past and future tasks by topic. Topics are useful
because I can see which areas I've been focusing on and which ones I've
neglected. I do this organization manually, although I could probably
figure out how to use tags to jumpstart the process.
=(setq org-cycle-include-plain-lists 'integrate)= means that I can use
TAB to hide or show parts of the list. I use M-<down> and M-<right> for
most of the tasks, and I also cut and paste lines as needed. Because my
code sorts tasks alphabetically, I'm starting to name tasks with the
context at the beginning to make them easier to organize.

If I remember other accomplishments, I add them to this list. If I think
of other things I want to do, I add them to the list and I create tasks
for them. (I should probably write a function that does that...)

The categories and time totals are part of the weekly review template
inserted by =sacha/org-prepare-weekly-review=. I use my smartphone or
laptop to track time whenever I switch activities, occasionally
backdating or editing records if I happen to be away or distracted. If
I'm at my computer, I sometimes estimate and track time at the task
level using Org Mode's clocking feature. Since I'm not consistent with
task-based time-tracking, I use that mainly for investigating how much
time it takes me to do specific things, and I don't automatically
include that in my reports.

When I'm done, I use
[[https://github.com/punchagan/org2blog][=org2blog/wp-post-subtree=]] to
publish the draft to my blog. I preview it in WordPress to make sure
everything looks all right, and then publish it.

It's wonderful being able to tweak your task manager to fit the way you
work. Yay Emacs, Org Mode, WordPress, and making your own tools!
