#+TITLE: When I blog with Emacs and when I blog with other tools

September 16th, 2013 -
[[http://sachachua.com/blog/p/25995][http://sachachua.com/blog/p/25995]]

[[http://commons.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Org-mode-unicorn.svg][[[http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/a6/Org-mode-unicorn.svg/162px-Org-mode-unicorn.svg.png]]]]

English: org-mode logo: http://orgmode.org/worg/org-faq.php#unicorn
(Photo credit: Wikipedia)

I would love to be able to write all of my blog posts within Emacs. I
like the outline tools and simple markup of [[http://orgmode.org][Org
Mode]]. Org Mode and org2blog are invaluable when I'm writing a post
with lots of code or keyboard commands, because it's easy to set up
syntax highlighting or add teletype text.
[[http://www.pablumfication.co.uk/2012/01/15/blog-posting-with-emacs-using-org2blog/][Here's
an interesting self-referential example of org2blog's power]] that uses
=#INCLUDE= to include the Org blog post source in the post itself.

If I expect that a post will have lots of images, I tend to use
[[http://download.live.com/writer][Windows Live Writer]] because it
takes care of resizing and aligning images, linking to the original
size. Because it uses my blog's stylesheet, I can get a sense of how the
text will flow around it. I can quickly draw an idea in Autodesk
Sketchbook Pro, copy and paste it into Windows Live Writer, and then
resize it until it feels balanced on the page. Sometimes I draft a post
in Emacs and then open it in Windows Live Writer or
[[http://www.scribefire.com][ScribeFire]] so that I can add images.

Org Mode also supports images, but it's not as easy to resize things
there. If I wrote a function that used
[[http://www.imagemagick.org/][ImageMagick]] to save the clipboard image
to a file, resize it to the appropriate dimensions, and link it to the
full-size image, maybe that would do the trick. Still, that sounds like
it would be a fair bit of work. Maybe someday. Hmm -- any chance someone
reading this blog happens to already have that snippet handy? =)

If I need to edit an existing post, I either use the WordPress web
interface or I use ScribeFire. That way, I don't have to fill in the
post publishing date again.

It's a bit of a patchwork system of different tools, but it does the
job. What's your workflow like?

#+CAPTION: 

[[http://img.zemanta.com/pixy.gif?x-id=bd62493d-5077-4af0-9728-b76d69b65776]]
