#+TITLE: How Org Mode helps me deal with an ever-growing backlog

April 25th, 2014 -
[[http://sachachua.com/blog/p/27181][http://sachachua.com/blog/p/27181]]

If you're like me, you probably have a to-do list several miles long. I
like thinking of this as the backlog from agile programming. It's a list
of tasks that I could choose to work on, but I haven't committed to
doing everything on the list. This means I don't have to waste energy
feeling guilty about not getting everything done. Instead, I can treat
it like a
[[http://sachachua.com/blog/2014/03/reflecting-goals-time/][buffet of
projects]] to choose from depending on what I feel like working on.

[[file:uploads/2014/04/2014-04-28-Dealing-with-an-ever-growing-backlog.png][file:uploads/2014/04/2014-04-28-Dealing-with-an-ever-growing-backlog-640x378.png]]

2014-04-28 Dealing with an ever-growing backlog

I think I add tasks faster than I cross tasks out. (Hmm, I should track
this!) It never ends. Most tasks suggest next steps I could take after I
finish the first ones. You might think that an ever-growing to-do list
is a bad thing. This is okay. In fact, this is good. It means that I'll
always have a variety of tasks to choose from.

People manage tasks in different ways. For my personal tasks, I use
several large text files in [[http://orgmode.org][Org Mode]] for Emacs.
Org Mode is an outline-based tool which makes it easy for me to organize
my tasks into projects and projects into themes. It also supports
tagging, links, agendas, dynamic views, and all sorts of other great
ways to slice-and-dice my task list. Here's how I deal with some of the
common challenges people face with a large task backlog:

-  Making sure important, urgent tasks don't fall through the cracks
-  Making sure you don't neglect important but not urgent tasks
-  Keeping track of what you're waiting for
-  Catching procrastination

*** Making sure important, urgent tasks don't fall through the cracks

If something has a deadline, I add the deadline in Org using =C-c C-d=
(=org-deadline=). This means that reminders will appear on my daily
agenda for the 14 days before the deadline, counting down to the
deadline itself. (The number of days is controlled by
=org-deadline-warning-days=.) In addition, I usually schedule the task
for a day that I want to work on it, so that I can get the task out of
the way.

I'm careful about what I commit to, erring on the side of
under-committing rather than over-committing. I'm selective about my
client work and my volunteering. I keep my schedule as open as I can,
and I'm not afraid to reschedule if I need to. Hardly anything I work on
could be considered urgent. If an urgent request does come in, I ask
questions to determine its true urgency, including potential
alternatives and consequences of failure.

You might not have as much choice about what to work on, but you might
also be surprised by how much you can push back. Be careful about what
you allow to be urgent in your life.

*** Making sure you don't neglect important but not urgent tasks

I have plenty of space to work on things that are important but not
urgent because I manage my commitments carefully. This means that I can
usually finish a few important-but-not-urgent tasks every day.

Which tasks do I consider important? I like thinking in terms of
projects. Important tasks tend to be associated with projects instead of
standing in isolation. Important tasks move me toward a specific goal. I
have [[http://sachachua.com/evil-plans][many goals and projects]], but
because they're fewer than the number of tasks I have, I can prioritize
them more easily. I can decide that some projects are in the background
and some are in focus. Important tasks are the tasks that help me make
more progress on the projects I consider important.

Because I like having two or three projects on the go, it helps to make
sure that I make regular progress on those projects instead of getting
carried away on just one. Tracking my time helps me stay aware of that
balance. I also review my projects every week and schedule specific
tasks for each of them, so I can make a little progress at least. Once I
switch context and start thinking about a project, it's easy to pick
another couple of tasks in that area and get even more done.

If you're struggling with creating enough space to work on important but
not urgent tasks, you might be able to partner up with someone so that
you can block off time to work on non-urgent things. Many teams have a
rotating schedule for dealing with customer requests or urgent issues.
One person covers the requests for a day, allowing the rest of the team
to focus. Then the next person takes on that duty, and so on.

*** Keeping track of what you're waiting for

One of the useful tips I picked up from David Allen's Getting Things
Done book was the idea of marking a task as WAITING. I usually add a
description of what I'm waiting for, who's responsible, and when I want
to follow up. This makes it easier to follow up. When I'm waiting for a
specific date (ex: the library makes a DVD hold-able after a certain
date), I schedule the task for then.

I use the [[http://www.boomeranggmail.com/][Boomerang for Gmail]]
extension when I'm waiting for an e-mail reply. Boomerang lets me pop
the message back into my inbox if I haven't received a reply by a
specific date, so I don't have to keep track of that myself.

*** Handling less-important but still useful things

There are tasks on my to-do list that have been on that list for years.
This is okay.
 I'm getting better at noting names and contact information in my tasks
so that I can follow up with people even after some time. This is
particularly useful for book recommendations. I get a lot of book
recommendations and I get most of my books from the library, so there's
usually a delay of a few weeks. Because Org Mode lets me add notes and
links to the body of a task, I can look up information easily.

I work on less-important tasks when I don't feel like working on my
major tasks, or when I'm looking for small tasks so I can fill in the
gaps of my day. Org Mode gives me plenty of ways to look up tasks. I
usually look for tasks by projects, navigating through my outline. I can
also look for tasks by effort estimate, so I can see everything that
will probably take me less than 15 minutes. Context is useful too -- I
can search for various tags to find tasks I can do while I'm on the
phone, or out on errands, or when I feel like writing or drawing.

I like thinking in terms of low-hanging fruit, so I often choose tasks
that require little time or effort and have good impact. It can be
overwhelming to look at a long list of tasks and decide which ones have
good return. It's easier to tag these tasks when you create the task, or
to think in terms of projects instead.

Some tasks grow in importance or urgency over time. If I want to make
sure that I revisit a task on a certain date, I schedule it for then.

*** Catching procrastination

I still end up rescheduling tasks multiple times. (I've been putting off
redoing my business cards for a few months now!) I've noticed that there
are different kinds of procrastination, including:

-  *Procrastinating because you don't have time today:* It's easy to
   reschedule things a few weeks or a month in advance. In fact, Org has
   a built-in command for bulk-scattering tasks. From the agenda view,
   you can type =m= to mark multiple tasks, then type =B= and then =S=
   to scatter tasks randomly over the next N days. (Call it with a
   prefix argument as =C-u B S= to limit it to weekdays.) If I catch
   myself procrastinating because I don't have enough time, that's
   usually a sign to be more cautious about my estimates and
   commitments, so I adjust those too.
-  *Procrastinating because it's less important than other tasks:* This
   is related to the time reason. I have no qualms about pushing
   less-important tasks forward.
-  *Procrastinating because you don't feel like working on it:* Is the
   task actually important? If it's not, I usually get rid of it without
   feeling guilty. If it's still useful, I might unschedule it so that I
   see it only if I'm looking for tasks in that project or in that
   context. Alternatively, I can just mark the task as CANCELLED or
   SOMEDAY. If the task is important, I think about whether I'm likely
   to feel like working on it at some point in the future. If I'm likely
   to not feel any different about it, I might delegate it, or I might
   just sit down and do it since procrastination doesn't add value. On
   the other hand, if I'm likely to feel like working on it at some
   point, then I tag it with that context and push it out to some other
   date.
-  *Procrastinating because you forgot about it:* I usually check my
   agenda every day and Org shows forgotten things in a different
   colour, so I catch these quickly. If the tasks are more important
   than the tasks I've already scheduled, I might work on those first.
   Alternatively, I might schedule it for sometime later.

I procrastinate based on my to-do list, not based on my inbox. The inbox
is a terribly unstructured way to manage your tasks. I use Boomerang for
Gmail to defer some mail to a later date, but that's usually so that I
can pop it back into my inbox the day that I meet someone so that I have
context and so that I don't have to copy the link into the calendar
entry or my TO-DO list.

*** Wrapping up

So that's how I deal with having a large backlog. I focus first on the
stuff that I need to do, and I make sure that shows up on my agenda.
Then I make it easy to look for stuff that I want to do using Org's
support for projects, tags, time estimates, and so on. I don't feel
guilty about having lots of tasks to choose from. I view my backlog
positively. It lets me do good stuff without worrying too much about how
I spend my time.

How do you deal with your backlog? =)

Sneak peek! Writing this post prompted me to start tracking whether my
backlog grew or shrank each day.
[[http://sachachua.com/blog/?p=27211&shareadraft=baba27211_535a80ec49274][Check
out my preliminary results and the code I used to analyze my TODOs.]]

2014-04-27: Fixed typo in keybinding -- thanks, Sujith Abraham!
