#+TITLE: Emacs Basics: Using the mouse

March 24th, 2014 -
[[http://sachachua.com/blog/p/27075][http://sachachua.com/blog/p/27075]]

This entry is part 1 of 3 in the series
[[http://sachachua.com/blog/series/emacs-basics-2/][Emacs Basics]]

[[http://archive.org/download/EmacsBasicsUsingTheMouse/Emacs-Basics-Using-the-Mouse.mp3][You
can download the MP3 from archive.org.]]

Transcript:

I'm Sacha Chua and this is an Emacs Basics episode on using the mouse.
The best way to use Emacs is to master the keyboard shortcuts, but when
you're starting out, don't worry about them yet. You might find yourself
using the mouse a whole lot more than you used to, but over time, you
will learn more and more keyboard shortcuts as you get used to Emacs. So
let's say that you're just starting out. What are some of the things
that you can do right away to get the hang of using Emacs?

The Emacs tutorial is a great place to start. You can get to that by
clicking on the Emacs tutorial link on the splash screen. If you've done
the tutorial before, it will offer to let you resume at that point. If
you don't have the splash screen handy, you can also get to the tutorial
from *Help > Emacs tutorial*. Go through this and you'll learn a lot of
the common keyboard shortcuts that will come in handy.

The toolbar and the menu will also give you quick access to a lot of
common commands. If you'd like to create a new file or open an existing
file, you can click on the *New file* icon located in the top left. You
can specify the file, and if the file doesn't exist yet, it will create
it. To save the file, click on the *Save* icon. If you'd like to close a
file, just click on the *X* mark. You can open the file again using the
toolbar icon.

To copy and paste, use your mouse to select a region of text, then copy
or cut it. Then you can paste it wherever you want. You could also
search for text. Click on that search button and start typing what
you're looking for. It will highlight the search results. Press *Ctrl+s*
to search for the next instance. Press *Enter* to stop searching.

The menus also offer a lot of other commands. For example, you can
insert a file. You can save the current buffer with another file name.
You can split your windows so you can see more than one file at the same
time. If you'd like to close a window and go back to having one file
across your entire screen, you just have to use *File > Remove other
windows*. To switch between the files you have open, use the *Buffers*
menu. Explore the menus for other options.

One of the interesting things in Emacs is that you can copy or cut
multiple things and then paste them without having to keep copying or
cutting each time. For example, if I copy this, then *Paste* will paste
that. But you could also access the things that you copied or cut
previously. Just click on *Edit > Paste from kill menu,* then select the
item you want to paste.

There are lots of other tools that are available in Emacs. The
availability of these tools may depend on what else you've installed.
Again, for more information, check out the Emacs tutorial or read the
Emacs manual.

Have fun!

Series
Navigation[[http://sachachua.com/blog/2014/03/emacs-basics-call-commands-name-m-x-tips-better-completion-using-ido-helm/][Emacs
Basics: Call commands by name with M-x (with tips for better completion
using ido or helm) Â»]]

[[http://archive.org/download/EmacsBasicsUsingTheMouse/Emacs-Basics-Using-the-Mouse.mp3][[[http://sachachua.com/blog/wp-content/plugins/powerpress/play_audio.png]]]]

Podcast:
[[http://archive.org/download/EmacsBasicsUsingTheMouse/Emacs-Basics-Using-the-Mouse.mp3][Play
in new window]] |
[[http://archive.org/download/EmacsBasicsUsingTheMouse/Emacs-Basics-Using-the-Mouse.mp3][Download]]
